# foodborne-diseases-outbreak-prediction


INTRODUCTION

Foodborne disease is a serious issue that needs to be addressed because of its effects for the last two decades. To measure one of the global problem Foodborne diseases, an initiative was launched by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2006 along with its partners. To lead the initiative, Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group (FERG) was established in the year 2007. Since then WHO is constantly working to provide better estimates about the global burden of foodborne diseases. For avoiding any health-related problems like illnesses, allergy etc., people are required to consume hygienic food. It also helps to prevent consumers from risks of food poisoning and even death. Consumers expect hygienic food, but it is not always possible. Therefore, developing approaches for diseases prediction based on the consumption of food, its location and other factors related to the illness of consumers is very necessary. 
Several countries adopt advanced techniques and monitoring systems in order to achieve food safety which plays a major role in healthy life but still outbreaks of the foodborne disease remain a common problem. Consumption of contaminated food etc. could lead to the outbreak of the foodborne diseases. Foodborne infections can occur due to many reasons like disease-causing microorganisms or pathogens. In addition to these, food items which are doped with poisonous chemicals also lead to foodborne diseases. But contamination of food by chemicals, micro-organisms, etc. can occur at any stage before the food reaches the consumer. Therefore, it is time-consuming to verify every stage to find if the food is contaminated or not. Hence we use previous data to predict which illness can be caused by consuming which food.
Implementation of the control and prevention measures for foodborne diseases in the food industry should be the primary task of health officials. In the same way, the adoption of advanced techniques at every level of food from its production to consumption will be helpful to strengthen food safety. Next, to find out the reason for the outbreak helps us to gain information about the factors which triggered foodborne diseases. Finally, observing previous data will leads to find out patterns in the outbreaks and helps to implement prevention measures for foodborne diseases. This collective information could guarantee the changes which result in improving food safety.
In our project, we focus on two issues. First is to find the food that causes foodborne disease outbreak also referred to as food vehicle and second is to find a place where foodborne disease outbreak is most likely to occur, i.e., food location (e.g., home, hospital, restaurant etc.). For preventing outbreaks, it is very important to identify the food that is most frequently linked to a particular outbreak. To analyze food type and location, some work has been done in the past, but no prior work has been done to find hidden patterns in the relationship between location, food type, and disease outbreak. For addressing this gap, we have suggested the use of some deep learning and data mining algorithms so that we can extract some patterns for foodborne diseases from CDC Outbreak Surveillance Data.
The goal of our project is to apply supervised machine learning techniquesto build predictive models to predict whether a case is suspected, confirmed orno food borne illness and the number of people that may be affected with foodborne illnesses.We also intend to address the following questions – Whethera particular food can cause food borne disease?, Which pathogens, toxins orchemicals in the food lead to diseases?, Food Combinations and their potentialinfection source(pathogen/toxin/chemical), Deem a food to be fatal on the basisof number of hospitalizations and fatalities?

Dataset attribute

The dataset used in this project provides data on foodborne disease outbreaksreportedtoCDCfrom1998through2015.Datafieldsincludeyear, state (outbreaks occurring in more than one state are listed as "multistate"), location where the food was prepared, reported food vehicle and contaminated ingredient, etiology (the pathogen, toxin, or chemical that causedtheillnesses),status(whethertheetiologywasconfirmedsuspected), total illnesses, hospitalizations, and fatalities. In many outbreak investigations, a specific food vehicle is not identified for these outbreaks, the food vehicle variable is blank .



DATA PREPROCESSING

Data preprocessing describes any type of processing performed on raw data to prepare it for another processing procedure. Commonly used as a preliminary data mining practice, data preprocessing transforms the data into a format that will be more easily and effectively processed for the purpose of the user for example, in a neural network. There are a number of different tools and methods used for preprocessing, including: sampling, which  selects  a  representative  subset  from  a  large  population   of  data; transformation, which manipulates raw data to produce a  single input; denoising, which removes noise from data; normalization, which organizes data for more efficient access; and feature extraction, which pulls out specified data that is significant in some particular context.

In a customer relationship management (CRM) context, data preprocessing is a component of Web mining. Web usage logs may be preprocessed to extract meaningful sets of data called user transactions, which consist of groups of URL references. User sessions may be tracked to identify the user, the Web sites requested and their order, and the length of time spent on each one. Once these have been pulled out of the raw data, they yield more useful information that can be put to the user's purposes, such as consumer research, marketing, or personalization.

In our dataset we have declared the class attribute as “Status”. This attribute has 23 unique values but we require only values i.e., “Confirmed”, “Suspected”, “ ” and we delete all the rows where status have value other than the above mentioned values. Earlier we had 19119 observations in our dataset but after removing rows based on above approach, we remained with 18063 no. of observations. Next we convert attributes i.e., “Location”, “Food”, “Species” into numerical attributes i.e., “location”, “food”, “species” based on the values of corresponding attributes respectively. In attributes i.e., “location”, “food”, “species” value corresponding to empty strings are replaced with “NA”. Next we replace “NA” values with the most repeated value(mode) in that attribute respectively. 


Data visulalization


using ggplot and qplot function 


